well today I thought I'd answer this
question why are the planets round
because we get asked this a lot at the
end of our lectures and it takes a
little bit of explaining so let's have a
go at this
one what we'll do first is have a look
at the planets of our solar system and
these are photos that I've taken with my
telescope in my home Observatory from my
backyard here near Cambridge in the UK
in the top row we've got Mercury Venus
and Mars the inner
planets and in the bottom row Jupiter
Saturn Uranus and Neptune and you can
see that they're all round Saturn of
course is resplendent there with its
rings but if we look at them
individually Mercury small very
difficult to photograph it's always so
low in the sky near the sun looking at
it in the Twilight so my picture is a
bit rubbish really Venus is a bit better
but there's never very much to see
because all we see is the cloud tops
very reflective shiny very bright indeed
especially at the moment was looking at
it last night and uh showing people with
the telescopes out on the lawn at the
observatory in Cambridge um great view
but you just see the phases and that's
it Mars on the other hand is smaller but
there's quite a bit more detail this
picture's come out quite nicely we've
got the polar caps at at the top and
bottom one larger than the other showing
how the seasons vary depending on the
tilt of the planet towards the sun gets
warmer or colder and the ice caps grow
and Shrink you've got the red Rusty
deserts and the highlands looking darker
you even got some ice clouds in the
morning and evening Sky just on the two
sides of the planet there particularly
on the right hand side you can see the
ice clouds in the bottom row Jupiter
that's a fantastic picture we've got the
great red spot we've got the equatorial
Cloud belts with their orange colors the
polar regions even got some bluish
barges as they're called in that uh top
Bel uh belt there just above the equator
Saturn of course with the Rings little
bit blurry it was a bit low in the sky
when I took this picture and then we
have Uranus green and Neptune blue
they're very very distant and very hard
to photograph uh with a setup like mine
but I was very pleased with
these now before we go any further if
anybody comments that the Earth is flat
it's just not um that uh BS I'm not
going to deal with I'll be just deleting
or ignoring your comments so let's move
on from that one we've got the planet
rise there uh showing the Earth and
we've got a picture showing Across The
Straits of Gibralter that uh the
buildings on the far side have partly
disappeared below the Horizon because of
the curv it here so let's move
on when you go to school they tell you
that the planet planet Earth that we
live on is round and they call it a
round ball to begin with and that's all
well and good but it's not a very
mathematical description you soon learn
that we should really describe such
things as a sphere and some little
mathematics pops in and we get that the
volume of the sphere is 4/3 pi R cubed
where r is the radius and you can start
to do some maths with
that however you also learn about spin
and centripetal and centrifugal forces
you experience it and the day-to-day
description of a centrifugal force
throwing you outwards when you're on a
roundabout or in this case throwing this
uh hammer ball out away from the athlete
when he lets go of the string uh is is
the sort of common
parlance the common language for
describing it but really what's going on
is that the ball wants to move in a
straight line inertia means it will
carry on moving as it has been moving
without any forces at all so if you cut
the string or you let go then the ball
would just moov in the direction it was
going whereas while the string is still
there the tension in the string and the
pull in the athletes arms there is
pulling in towards the center a
centripetal force causing the ball to
continually change direction and move
around in an orbit around the center and
with
planets that has an effect as they spin
around we spin once every uh day on our
axis and that causes them to be a little
bit fatter at the equator than they are
at the poles it throws the material
outwards if you like and
what we find is that they have to change
the formula because the radius at the
equator is not quite the same as the
radius at the pole and we get 4/3 pi a^
2 C it's actually a fairly modest change
to the
mathematics and of course that does make
a difference to real planets here's
Jupiter again my image this spins round
on its axis in just under 10 hours not
all of the layers of it spin at the same
speed it spins a bit faster at the
equator than it does at the poles in
fact because it's made of gas um but the
gas at the equator is moving at
43,000 kilm an hour 28,000 miles an hour
very very fast indeed because it's such
a big planet radius is is 10 and a half
times that of the Earth getting on for
11 and in fact it's fatter at the
Equator the numbers are on the screen
here
71,000 kilm 11.2 two times the Earth's
radius as opposed to at the poles where
it's only 66 10 and 1 half times the
Earth's radius so there's quite a big
difference there of about 5,000
kilometers which is uh pretty huge
actually um and so this tremendous spin
is making it significantly fatter than
it is uh allall you can see that when
you look at it through a telescope you
immediately notice that it's U not a a
circle same is true of the Earth but the
difference is rather more
modest the Earth is distorted the
equatorial radius is
6,378 and the polar radius
6357 so what's that 21 km difference
quite a small deviation and it's because
the spin rate is much slower we take 24
hours to go right round and the angular
speed is only 1,000 M hour, 1600 km not
the 40
3,000 that it is for the uh much larger
planet Jupiter that spins much
faster but the roundest object in the
solar system is in fact the planet Venus
it is very very close to
spherical they say the radius of
6,051 kilm just a little bit less than
that of the Earth but this perfectly
spherical shape is because it spins so
slowly it takes 200 43 Earth days to
rotate once on its axis so there's very
very little by way of force throwing it
off
into being not completely spherical and
in fact we've moved from spherical to
oblate spheroid but planets can be a
little bit off that they can be elip
soidal so in fact all three radi can be
different and when you go to university
they teach you the formula for an
ellipsoid and in fact it's not too
difficult it's still 4/3 pi but it's a *
B * C where these are the three
different radii so more like the shape
of a rugby ball than a football if
you're British or an American football
rather than a soccer ball if you're from
the
US
however once you really get to
University they will go one stage
further and say that everything that
you've learned so far is wrong and that
the true shape of the earth is a
geoid so we we go through our education
process they tell us it's round that
it's ball-shaped that it's spherical
that it's an oblate spheroid that it's
ellipsoidal and finally a
geid and what does geid mean well it
means Earth shaped when you look it up
in the dictionary so you do have to
wonder what you've learned along the
way however we're here to talk talk
about why well it all goes back to this
guy Isaac
Newton he realized that there is the
universal force of gravity which keeps
planets in their orbits makes apples
fall and explains why planets are round
the force pulls everything towards the
center of mass the center of the the
object whatever it happens to be so for
a spherical object the force is pulling
inwards equally in all
directions why though does that make
things round well if you think about it
if you are riding your bicycle and you
cycle up a hill it's quite difficult you
have to put energy in you're converting
energy into potential energy stored in
the the gravitational field as you climb
up to the top of the hill and then when
you whiz Down The Far Side you release
it again turning it into kinetic energy
and speeding off into the distance and
the same is true with a mountain like
Mount Everest we have here um where bits
of it will fall off and roll down the
hills side and try and find their way to
the lowest possible Point lowering their
potential energy releasing that energy
as energy of movement kinetic energy and
eventually through friction turning it
into heat and letting it escape and this
is a law of nature that everything tries
to minimize the total energy of the
system by things falling down and we can
illustrate that very simply with a nice
little diagram a brick wall here we've
got 10 bricks in two rows five of them
are on the ground they're height zero
we're defining that to be our zero
reference point and five of them are one
unit further up so the total energy is 5
* n+ 5 * 1 for the height and that's
five so if we move one of them and it
goes higher up that's cost us because
we've now got five at zero four at one
and one at height two and if you add all
of that up it's six so it's cost us one
unit of energy to push that brick to a
higher position and so if it had the
chance it would fall back down and give
us a lower energy State now I've drawn
this as flat but it works if you extend
that and curve it right around the the
the side of the earth you H if you have
a mountain you're better off not having
a mountain and filling in hole it's as
simple as that it brings all the mass to
the lowest possible position near the
center now inside planets things get
more complicated this is a sort of
cutaway view of the Earth showing the
the uh biosphere and the atmosphere and
the ocean on the top and then the the
mantle and then deeper inside the liquid
sorry the crust first and then the
mantle and then deeper inside we have
the inner and outer cores uh shown in
glowing Furious ly red because they are
indeed very hot
indeed well those cores those are made
of metals and the outer layers are made
of rock and then we have the liquid and
the gas on the outside and the densities
of those materials are around about 5
six seven prob maybe higher for some of
the metals in the core three and a half
or so for the Rock and then the uh water
has got a density of one by definition 1
cubic cm
uh of water weighs one gram and then of
course the air and the atmosphere very
low density volatile material
so the dense Things fall to the center
and this again is described by this very
simple diagram here we've got a planet
in the process of formation we have Rock
in the form of the orange bricks and
we've got a lump of metal in the form of
the gray brick and the gray brick is
clearly in the top row there and if you
work out what's going to happen it's
going to swap places given a chance with
the rock lower down and this swap swaps
a rock of density of about three a metal
of density of about seven so we've moved
three units up and four units down we've
swapped four units of weight downwards
by one row so we've released four units
of energy and so the densest materials
are better off being in the center it
lowers the total energy of the system
and that can happen because inside the
earth inside the planets a tremendous
amount of heat is stored and trapped
it's overlin by all of these outer
layers which act as a a blanket very
fairly low thermal conductivity so the
heat has a job to get out and a lot of
that heat about 60% of it came from the
form
process of the planet
itself that has two sources one is the
material that made up the planet
crashing into uh itself gradually
building larger and larger baby planets
growing then them crashing into each
other and making larger and larger
objects socaled accretion process
building a larger object and all of that
kinetic energy of motion coming to a
sudden stop releases a lot of heat and
so in the formation process of the earth
and the planets they would have pretty
much been molten balls of lava uh
mixtures of of
elements being molten though allows the
heavier elements to sink and sink down
towards the center the denser the
material the deeper into the core it
will have sunk so all the original heavy
metals lot of iron lot of nickel will
have all sunk down into the center
that process of
differentiation also releases a lot of
energy as we've just shown with our
bricks in the wall diagram the sinking
of the metal gives out energy we swap
heavy metal for lighter Rock moving it
towards the center and so it releases
potential energy and it's doing that all
the time it's still doing it now there's
still Metals sinking in towards the
center um obviously at a lower rate now
CU most of it has already arrived but
that differentiation process grows the
core releases energy deep within the
planet and that has a hard time getting
out so that original heater formation
and the heat from differentiation melts
the materials very effectively plus of
course the very early solar system was
formed from the material left over
from previous generations of stars and
those Stars exploded as supern noi some
of the giant Stars throwing the material
out into a cloud of matter that
eventually cooled and collapsed but a
lot of that material was made massively
radioactive and so the early Earth was
hugely Radioactive in all of its
material and that radioactivity released
a terrific amount of energy and is still
doing so we think about 40% % of the
total heat within the Earth comes from
radioactive decay of elements like
aluminium potassium in their radioactive
isotope forms they are gradually
decaying other longer lived Isotopes
uranium thorium and so forth they're
still decaying away still releasing
energy and keeping the planet's core hot
um and that's a good thing because the
hot planetary core causes churning of
the magnetic material the magnetic iron
and that gives us our magnetic field as
we spin around and orbit around the sun
um and uh that magnetic Field's very
important for protecting the planet in
fact the inner planets of the solar
system have all got these uh heavy metal
cores these iron nickel Rich cores some
of them more so than others mercury has
a particularly large core for its size
and perhaps Mars and the moon have
smaller cores if you work out the
overall density Mercury Venus and Earth
have an average density of about 5 1
half gram per cubic cm the moon and Mars
it's more like 3 and a half um so rather
less metal and more rock but
nevertheless the process is the same if
we look at the outer planets well
they've got huge amounts of volatile
materials they were probably formed much
further away from the Sun where it was
much cooler and so all the volatile
gases like hydrogen and helium methane
ammonia water Etc were able to condense
and not be boiled away and Blown Away by
the heat of the young sun and so we've
got these vast volatile atmospheres
they've probably got cores in the center
we haven't really been able to prove
that yet um but this vast gaseous
envelope of them has produced a much
lower density Saturn less than one gram
per cubic cm so it would float if you
could find a bath of water large enough
the others a little bit more I think
Jupiter is about 1.3 and the ice giants
as they're called Uranus and Neptune lot
colder and those are about 1.7 Gams per
cubic cm so much less dense than the
rest of the planets but nevertheless we
think that the dense materials have all
sunk right into the center in this
planetary differentiation process so
really the overall thing is that gravity
uh drives swings it drives apples to
fall it puts things into orbit pulls
things towards the center and that
includes pulling all the material to be
as closely packed as possible in
whatever shape you have subject to the
strength of the material so in fact
asteroids can be potato shaped because
they're not big enough to have enough
gravity to pull themselves round but
anything bigger than about 150 to 200
kilom in diameter tends to pull itself
round because gravity overwhelms the
strength of the material and of course
that's much easier if it's melted in the
center through all of that heat that
I've described so thanks very much for
listening today and I'll be back with
further videos later